.TH MAILBOX\-CLEANER 1 "2026-05-25" "0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
mailbox\-cleaner \- move old IMAP messages to Thunderbird Local Folders
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mailbox\-cleaner
.RB [ \-\-host
.IR HOST ]
.RB [ \-\-port
.IR PORT ]
.RB [ \-\-user
.IR USER ]
.RB [ \-\-password
.IR PASSWORD ]
.RB [ \-\-folder
.IR FOLDER ]
.RB [ \-\-older\-than
.IR DAYS ]
.RB [ \-\-archive\-name
.IR NAME ]
.RB [ \-\-thunderbird\-profile
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-\-batch\-size
.IR N ]
.RB [ \-\-dry\-run ]
.RB [ \-\-deploy
.RB [ \-\-interval
.IR CALENDAR ]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B mailbox\-cleaner
connects to an IMAP server over SSL, searches a folder for messages older than
a configurable number of days, and appends them to an mbox file inside
Thunderbird's Local Folders directory.
The originals are then deleted from the server and expunged, freeing quota.
.PP
Processing is done in batches to avoid connection timeouts on large mailboxes.
Run the command repeatedly until no messages remain.
After archiving, restart Thunderbird or right-click the target folder and choose
.B Repair Folder
to rebuild the index.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BI \-\-host " HOST"
IMAP server hostname.
Can also be set via the
.B IMAP_HOST
environment variable.
.TP
.BI \-\-port " PORT"
IMAP SSL port.
Default:
.BR 993 .
Environment variable:
.BR IMAP_PORT .
.TP
.BI \-\-user " USER"
IMAP account username.
Environment variable:
.BR IMAP_USER .
.TP
.BI \-\-password " PASSWORD"
IMAP account password.
Environment variable:
.BR IMAP_PASSWORD .
.TP
.BI \-\-folder " FOLDER"
IMAP folder to archive messages from.
Default:
.BR INBOX .
Environment variable:
.BR IMAP_FOLDER .
.TP
.BI \-\-older\-than " DAYS"
Archive messages with a date older than
.I DAYS
days.
Default:
.BR 365 .
Environment variable:
.BR IMAP_OLDER_THAN .
.TP
.BI \-\-archive\-name " NAME"
Name of the destination folder inside Thunderbird Local Folders.
Created automatically if it does not exist.
Default:
.BR Archive .
Environment variable:
.BR ARCHIVE_NAME .
.TP
.BI \-\-thunderbird\-profile " PATH"
Explicit path to the Thunderbird
.I "Local Folders"
directory
(e.g.\&
.IR ~/.thunderbird/abc123.default/Mail/Local\ Folders ).
If omitted, the first profile found under
.I ~/.thunderbird/
is used.
Environment variable:
.BR THUNDERBIRD_PROFILE .
.TP
.BI \-\-batch\-size " N"
Maximum number of messages to process in a single run.
Default:
.BR 200 .
Environment variable:
.BR BATCH_SIZE .
.TP
.B \-\-dry\-run
Print the UIDs of messages that would be archived without downloading,
writing, or deleting anything.
.TP
.B \-\-deploy
Install a systemd user service and timer that run
.B mailbox\-cleaner
automatically on the schedule given by
.BR \-\-interval .
All current option values are saved to
.I ~/.config/mailbox-cleaner.env
(mode 600) and loaded by the service at run time.
The timer is enabled and started immediately.
.TP
.BI \-\-interval " CALENDAR"
Systemd
.B OnCalendar
expression used by
.BR \-\-deploy .
Default:
.BR daily .
Accepts any value accepted by systemd calendar syntax, for example
.BR weekly ,
.BR hourly ,
or
.BR "\(dqMon *\-*\-* 02:00:00\(dq" .
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
A required argument is missing, the Thunderbird profile could not be
located, or a fatal error occurred during execution.
.SH ENVIRONMENT
All long options have a corresponding environment variable listed in
.SM OPTIONS
above.
Environment variables are used as defaults and are overridden by explicit
command-line flags.
.SH FILES
.TP
.I ~/.config/mailbox-cleaner.env
Credential and configuration file written by
.BR \-\-deploy .
Mode 600; readable only by the owning user.
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/mailbox-cleaner.service
Systemd user service unit written by
.BR \-\-deploy .
.TP
.I ~/.config/systemd/user/mailbox-cleaner.timer
Systemd user timer unit written by
.BR \-\-deploy .
.TP
.I ~/.thunderbird/*/Mail/Local\ Folders/<archive\-name>
Destination mbox file.
The
.I .msf
index alongside it is regenerated automatically by Thunderbird.
.SH EXAMPLES
Preview which messages in INBOX are older than one year:
.PP
.RS
.EX
mailbox\-cleaner \-\-host imap.example.com \e
                \-\-user me@example.com \e
                \-\-password secret \e
                \-\-older\-than 365 \e
                \-\-dry\-run
.EE
.RE
.PP
Archive the first 50 matching messages:
.PP
.RS
.EX
mailbox\-cleaner \-\-host imap.example.com \e
                \-\-user me@example.com \e
                \-\-password secret \e
                \-\-batch\-size 50
.EE
.RE
.PP
Install a weekly systemd timer that runs every Monday at 02:00:
.PP
.RS
.EX
mailbox\-cleaner \-\-host imap.example.com \e
                \-\-user me@example.com \e
                \-\-password secret \e
                \-\-deploy \e
                \-\-interval "Mon *\-*\-* 02:00:00"
.EE
.RE
.PP
Check timer status after deployment:
.PP
.RS
.EX
systemctl \-\-user list\-timers mailbox\-cleaner.timer
.EE
.RE
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR systemctl (1),
.BR thunderbird (1),
.BR mbox (5)
.SH AUTHOR
Vítězslav Dvořák <info@vitexsoftware.cz>
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2026 Vítězslav Dvořák.
License GPLv2+: GNU GPL version 2 or later
.UR https://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html
.UE .
